We're at the residence of Doris Davis in Houston.
Doris has been a force in the planning of Houston
for several years, and she will begin by telling us
briefly about her background before she got to
Texas.
To begin at the beginning in my career in planning,
I guess it was 1967 I decided to go to graduate
school in urban planning, and I did that at Wayne
State University. Why did you decide to go to
planning school? That's an interesting
question. Basically, I had a bachelor's degree in
psychology and sociology, and I was then married
to a clinical psychologist, and I wanted to, I had
been working, doing social research work at the
university, and I wanted to get a master's, and all
I knew was that I didn't want to do anything like
anyone I knew was doing, and I didn't know anyone
who was an urban planner. And of course having been
born and bred in Brooklyn, New York, I had a great
interest in urban areas. So it was kind of one of
those strange decisions that I didn't want to be
anything else and that sounded good. So you sort of
backed into it? Very much so, very much so. I think
many of us did that. Shortly before I finished my
degree, I went to work for a small consulting firm,
and as you probably realize, that's where you
learn how to be a planner is when you start working
at it. And then the next several years, I worked at
another, one of the first non-profit consulting
firms around, and we did a lot of work for money, and
we did a lot of work for free, and it all evened out
and was very interesting. Uh-huh. I also taught at
the Wayne County Community College where we had a
two-year program that offered a degree in
planning technology at that period of time when we
saw planning as a profession that had no end and
that felt there would be a great need for
technicians and assistants to professional
planners. I have no idea now what happened to that
program. In 1973, I moved to Houston.
had taken a job at the medical center here and
proceeded to attempt to find employment.
Interestingly, I had a lot of difficulty feeling
that I had a pretty good background in planning.
That was the very thing that seemed to make it hard
to find a job. There was a fair amount of suspicion
and concern about a northern planner that knew all
about zoning and that sort of thing, and that I
would try to maybe instill some of these northern
concepts into my work here. Early March 1st, as a
matter of fact, of 1974, I did go to work for the
Council of Governments. I was hired there as an
environmental planner, which was some
interesting since that hadn't, to that point,
been my background at all. However, I had a strong
background in demographics and land use and, in
fact, my initial assignments were to work in
demographics and land use for Environmental
planning is a backup to that. I do remember when you
were an environmental planner. That's when we got
to know each other first. Well, that was my
evolution, in a way, at HGAC was that whenever I
would decide that I was sort of bored and it was time
to move on, some opportunity would come up and I
would find a whole new area to work in. And
ultimately, as you know, before I left there, I was
manager of community and environmental
planning, and that had taken our environmental
program, our community development, economic
development program, and our information
program, which was the demographics and land use,
and pulled them all together into what was really
pretty much a comprehensive planning
department.
Doris, how do you perceive the How would you
characterize planning in Houston when you got
here? Well, it was a bad word. The very first sort of
professional planning meeting I attended in
Houston, even before I found a job, I'll never
forget, it was at Rice University, and the keynote
speaker was then Mayor Louis Welch. And he stood up
and announced to the audience that Houston had no
need of planners. Houston was doing fine growing
wild. And
this was, I see, so that you felt that the
environment was not particularly supportive.
Definitely. There was, almost appeared to be
concern about planners, and in fact when I went to
work at the Council of Government, there was
almost concern that I was a professional planner.
And although they portrayed themselves as a
regional planning agency, at the time, that I
started work, I think I was the second person there
that had a bona fide urban planning master's
degree in urban planning.
Now, from your knowledge of planning in the
Houston area in general, how do you see it
functioning in terms of,
well, let's characterize it first, long-range
planning and then day-to-day planning? And
planning administration, you probably have had
sufficient contact with city hall to have some
view of that. And you might concentrate first on
either that or HGAC, whatever you choose, and then
go from there. Well, in a way, I see them as separate
things. Let's keep them separately. If you look at
the city of Houston, per se, in planning, from the
first time I've been worked with them to this day.
Planning is very fragmented. Every department
has their own planning function, and they don't
share it. And I would say in the last few years that
the planning and development department has
perhaps brought in a little more on those plans,
but not to any great extent, so that Public Works
tends to do planning. And in fact, all of the big
money that has been spent in demographics has been
spent out of Public Works. being caught for
population forecasts for various plans that they
do. The health department does planning. The
solid waste department does planning. So that
it's not the concept of comprehensive planning is
really sort of alien in the city. Although, again,
in recent years, I think there have been more
efforts to think in terms of a comprehensive plan.
mid-75, I guess the city had done some, I can't
think of what it was called, it was Houston 2000 or
something like that, which was, as I remember,
consisted of a land use map of future land use.
Yeah, I have a copy of that. Okay. There was, and
when I was initially doing demographics, my first
few years at HGAC, it wasn't to understanding of
the political environment, there were many
clashes, say, with City Hall in our visions of what
the future growth would be like. And I, coming from
the dense urban cities of the North, tended to see
kind of centralized growth, particularly since
there was so much land in which that could occur,
whereas the view of city planning, which was the
view of City Hall, was spread it out as far as
possible and worry about the repercussions
later. And there have been repercussions. The
city was just hit with a half a million dollar fine
for wastewater violations. And in 1974, when I was
hired, it was because there were wastewater
concerns in the area. And the city then was under
notice that they would be enforced against.
During that period of time, they were so busy
building plants way out in the outer areas for new
growth, and no efforts were made to keep the inner
areas up to standards. Well, of course, Houston
has had continual problems with air pollution.
Yes, that's sort of another issue. Yeah, and they
had at one time an excellent director of their air
pollution control district, Mr. Cubedo. Yes, he
passed away. He passed away, and we haven't heard
much about it lately. But for a while, wasn't
Houston under a federal court order that
restricted any new industry? And that, again, was
in the early to middle 1970s, and I remember it
quite clearly because I was very impressed by the
southern way of doing business. I believe the EPA
said, you're not going to be able to grow anymore.
And Houston said, go away. And they went away.
Which is really about the way it sized up. And it's
still a problem today. And they are, again, facing
very severe penalties for ozone pollution in
particular.
So they simply said, go away, and the feds did.
Basically, that's what happened. There was a lot
of effort on the part of the Chamber of Commerce,
and there was a lot of activity. And I'm sure there
were some promises made, but there wasn't a great
deal of regulation or anything that I could
perceive happening in support of that. But they
sort of said, everything's fine here, and no, we
will not be enforced against, and so forth. That
appeared to me. I wasn't in the midst of the
happenings those days. But in viewing them,
that's what appeared to happen. It's my
understanding that most of the planning that is
done in actual fact is done by developers. Well,
there is a concept of private sector planning. And
in fact, to a large extent, a great deal of very fine
planning has gone on by developers. I think the
problem is when there is a conflict between the
public interest and the developer's interest
that private sector planning tends to fall down.
Those are some of my favorite things to discuss.
For example, if you're talking about zoning,
can't you accomplish the same ends in the way the
developer did by providing land uses that were
only compatible or patterns that were only
compatible to certain sorts of development. You
don't put a gas station in the middle of a
cul-de-sac, for example. And that was a way of
planning that can work. It's when the two
interests really separate that the problems
exist.
Okay.
How is the... city planning department
organized? Today. Well, when you first got here.
When I first got here, and I don't know that I'm the
right person to speak to this, my sense was that the
greatest city planning appeared to do two things.
One was to keep track of data, land use and changes,
and to try to forecast the future, and the other was
to work with developers on subdivisions and
plants. I never had a sense of any sort of overall
comprehensive planning. Today, the planning
department has many more responsibilities than
they had then. Community development under the
Community Development Block Grant is part of the
planning department. The planning department's
involved in economic development. they've taken
on some additional functions and they are making
an effort to do some comprehensive planning
starting at the neighborhood level and with the
idea of building a lot of neighborhood plans that
then could be incorporated into a proper
comprehensive plan. This is an approach I've
always referred to as cut and paste. Well, it can
be. I think that it's, at this point in time,
perhaps the only approach that's politically
feasible here. And even... I may be sorry I say
this, but the development ordinance that was
passed some years ago, which is a strong planning
tool in many ways, appeared to come out of city
council rather than out of the planning
department. Who administers the deed
restrictions that have to do with the use of land?
Does the planning department have any role in
this? Not that I know of. The only role, it's a
private... And the city some years ago felt it had,
and I believe it was challenged in the courts, and
indeed they had a legal right to assist in
upholding the restrictions. As far as I know, that
would be city legal. So a subdivision that was
having a problem keeping their restrictions
enforced, or if someone tried to do something
else, could go to city legal for assistance. And
I'm not positive about the way that works. I can
find out. OK. You got here during Roscoe Jones'
tenure as planning director. Yes. Who was the
executive director of HGAC when you got here? When
I got here, it was Royal Hatch, who was a retired
brigadier general from the Air Force and had
another career since and was working as, I believe
he was chairman of the Gulf Coast Waste Disposal
Authority before he came to HGAC. He'd only been
there less than a year when I went to work there.
What was his style of leadership?
His style was very much trying to work with the
elected officials closely and understanding the
concept of regionalism. He was very much an
outside man, worked with funding agencies,
worked with the city representatives and the
county representatives.
an inordinate amount of time with the day-to-day
technical aspects of planning. He left that to the
staff, pretty much. And he was succeeded by whom?
Jack Steele, who had been actually grew up in the
cog business, had worked at Southeast Texas
Regional Planning Commission, went to HGAC in, I
believe, 73 as criminal justice manager, and had
worked up to director of programs, deputy
executive director, and succeeded at Royal
Hatch. And what was his management style like?
Well, his management style, and he is still there
today, is very different. He is very technically
qualified in many areas. and pays a lot of
attention to the program areas rather than to the
political side of things or to spending a lot of
time, you know, whining and dining politicians.
Okay. What were some of the outstanding programs
of HGAC? Well, the HJC programs have evolved
considerably. Do you want me to kind of start at the
beginning? Sure. The COG was formed, as were most
COGs, I guess, in 1966, pretty much in response to
A95 and the desire locally to be part of approving
and disapproving federal projects. I think that
there was a fair amount of controversy about
whether to form a COG. And Emmet Lowery, who is
mayor of Texas City and was at the time and was on the
committee of elected officials that was meeting,
deciding whether to start a regional planning
commission, says that there was just
considerable disagreement. And a big issue, and I
think we may come back to this later, was how
communities would be represented because the
city of Houston was so big and compared to any of the
other cities and counties even, whether if it was
one man, one vote, then it was the city's cog. And if
it was equal representation, not caring about
population, then the city could very well get hurt
in the process. This has been a classical problem
facing cogs throughout the country. And I can
understand that. Oh, yeah. And, for example, when
I was with ABAC in the San Francisco region, There
we had two central cities, Oakland and San
Francisco. And there was a certain amount of
jealousy, of course, between, and then Berkeley
as a third. So it was quite complicated. And the
same thing has happened elsewhere in the country,
almost without exception. Well, and of course,
Houston was just so much bigger than any other
community. And it was agreed, though, that the
other communities just weren't interested if it
was going to be a Houston animal. Houston agreed at
that time that they would not take it over. And as
the, and I don't believe the board composition has
changed much over the years. When the COG was
formed it was eight counties and I don't know
exactly which year but about maybe two or four
years later it was made into 13 counties by the
state who determines the area. And the board of
directors, each county has One position, Harris
County being so large, has two. The city of Houston
has two seats, and other cities, 25,000 or over,
each have a seat. There are two seats for cities,
home rule cities under 25,000, and two seats for
general law cities under 25,000. One for
independent school districts, one for soil and
water conservation districts, and Houston
Independent School District. That's
interesting. At ABAC, none of the school
districts have representation. Only units of
general purpose government. Well, you know, some
of them don't even have school districts as
members.
So even though Houston and Harris County have four
seats out of 27, it doesn't allow them to have a
majority or to make the decisions for the COG.
However, I think there was recognition that
Houston needed in some way to work with some of the
other communities, and although that may be
getting ahead of myself, I really think the major
thing was that they needed to have this regional
planning commission in order to have a little more
power over grants that came into the area. Then, of
course, with the years of 701 money, there was a
natural source of funding, and it wasn't going to
cost anyone particularly anything to have this
animal. I think the planning that was done then was
extremely responsive to federal regulations. It
was minimal. We'll do what we have to do to keep the
money flowing, but we're not going to do too much
else. It was sort of a pipeline for money. Exactly.
In the early years, almost all of the work of the
very small staff, from what I gather, almost all
the work was done by consultants. So in addition to
doing what the federal government wanted, The
actual work was done by people that understood the
local interests and was, you know, quite
controlled. At the time that I went to the COG in
1974, there was still a perception that this would
try to be a tool of the federal government and one
had to always be cautious about it. And I think the
staff themselves were very torn all the time
between what the federal government wanted and
what a trained planner might feel would be the
right way to pursue a planning process, and what
the local governments appeared to want, which was
to leave them alone to do their own thing. So there
was a lot of conflict, I think, in early planning
efforts when the staff went too far towards what
they viewed of as planning. The board would tend to
get kind of upset about it, or individual
governments would. When the staff was doing what
the local governments appeared to want, the
federal government wasn't very happy. And in
fact, towards the end of 701 money, I guess in 79 and
80, we had really, before the money stopped
flowing, made a conscious decision that we
weren't going to apply for it any longer, because
we were had so much administrative work with
regard to the grant, and only a small piece of the
grants were being used to do what the local
governments wanted, which in those days was
information. They wanted good data. They wanted a
lot of day-to-day technical assistance and
handholding, which was valid. But they didn't
want the kinds of strategic plans that HUD was
beginning to require. And the one that we did for
HUD, In fact, never got out of draft form. The money
went away, and we never had to do anything further
about it. Plans that were controversial were
those that had to have local government approval
in addition to just the COG doing it.
But because there was a very good flow of money, the
COG in the early years did some very innovative
work. We were talking at lunch about Charles
Trost, for example. In the late 60s and early 70s,
he developed some very sophisticated computer
programs that we had a computerized library. What
was his title then? Well, he went through a bunch of
titles. He functioned in some ways as planning
director. He had one title was director for
intergovernmental affairs and His title and
titles at HJC were frequently not exactly
reflective of what people did. When I was told he
was planning director and went to look for a job
there, I was told to speak to someone else who was
director of special projects. So it was always
very confusing, at least in the early years, as to
what this was. And still the planning title was
uneasy for a local government. Frequently, in
fact, when we were maybe doing some of our best
planning, you'd never see anything called plan in
something. Anyway, the COG was involved in very
sophisticated computerized things. They were
involved in the very early days of Landsat
mapping, working with NASA and so forth. They
worked with David Birch from, I guess he was then
with Harvard, Yale. on what was called Recycum,
and it was a very sophisticated simulation model
that could spit out all kinds of demographics of
every sort, which wound up being something of a
fiasco because it got to be known as the Black Box,
and it was one of those things where you never could
figure out what went into it, and so what came out,
you weren't too sure about. But still, for
planning at that time, it was very sophisticated.
I kind of grew up in the days of 208, the big waste
treatment management planning, and though in
those years the Houston plan was considered some
disappointing, since it was in many areas very
great compromise, in retrospect, I find that it
really said some good things and was perhaps, you
know, a forerunner to what we might now call
strategic or policy planning. But at that time,
the concern of the local governments was that it
say, as little as possible, but be adequate to get
certified so that the construction grants money
would continue to flow. I think one of the most
important things that happened for the regional
agency, NHGAC in particular, given the political
surroundings and so forth, was when most of the
federal money dried up. And when there suddenly
wasn't federal money, and we were talking about
spending local, dollars or soliciting
contributions for specific work, the work became
more part of the local government. When did this
transition occur? This started happening in 80. I
guess the last of the 701 money was in 81. And
suddenly when we would present the budget, which
was a program type budget, you know, goals and
objectives and this is what it'll take to reach it.
The board started coming up with ideas of things
they wanted done. The first thing that I was
heavily involved with that was locally funded was
in 79, beginning in 79 when we had some major floods
in the area and the board said there must be
something that HGAC could be doing to make sense of
this problem. And initially, it started from the
fact that people were being evacuated from, say,
Galveston and being sent to Colorado County. And
no one in Colorado County was told they were
coming. And there wasn't enough food. And it was
just kind of horrendous. And it was then that HJC
started to begin to evolve into the role of truly
regional organizer
or, I can't think of a good word now. But we first did
an emergency, well, it wound up being a directory
for local officials in emergency preparedness or
something. And it was a step-by-step, here's what
you do if the water is going to rise. And it pulled
together information from all kinds of places. It
presented elected officials a workbook they
could put in their drawer where their city
manager, whoever, would fill out the phone
numbers that were right for that particular
jurisdiction. After that piece of work was
concluded, they said, but we need to do more.
There's still this enormous flood problem, and
it's clear that it might flood in Houston because
of rains in Fort Bend County or in Brazoria because
of rains in Harris County. What can we do about
this? And so they asked us to do a study that had
well, two major goals. One was who is really
involved in flood control. And secondly was kind
of assess what current efforts were. And what we
discovered was that there were hundreds of local
agencies, local, state, and federal agencies in
this 113 county area who had responsibilities in
flood control. And nobody was talking to anybody.
There were virtually no joint projects going on
between the two communities. very little, and
this was where you got into the local sticky
politics, very little of what we call floodplain
management, which tends to be land use
management. The report was very, very well
received, and as a follow-on piece of work, more
money, local money, was used to begin a flood
control task force. I don't know. That wasn't what
we called it. We called it It had sort of a nice name,
I can't remember. But it was, we got together the
major actors in the 13 counties, and they sat at a
table once a month, and they discussed flood
control issues. And a piece of work that they
basically, the staff did under their direction,
was to survey all of the communities and ask them
what equipment and manpower and so forth they had
that they would be willing to share with other
communities, and what projects they might be
willing to work on jointly. It was very valuable
from, if nothing else, from the extent that some of
these people said, well, now I know who to call if I
need help, which didn't exist before. It was
moving again towards this idea that in order for a
region to survive, even if there's one major
entity, you have to have coordination and
cooperation. And I think the COG began to evolve
into understanding how communities work
together. that even in some work we did for HUD
around the same time where HUD had an objective of
moving, decentralizing public housing and
moving people from one community to another, and
all of which didn't make a whole lot of sense here
because we just didn't have enough of it anywhere.
It wasn't a question of people being centralized.
And what we were able to do there was find that some
of the smaller housing authorities simply
weren't equipped to do a good job of housing
delivery. And this happens a lot when you have one
big community and a lot of little ones. And we
formed, again, an association of local housing
authorities and got the housing authorities
working together, which was the only way they
could move towards this goal of allowing people
movement within an area. And the issue of the
public housing on Allen Parkway is still with us,
isn't it? Yeah. And it was interesting, in the
course of that work, one of the more traumatic
times of my public service, there were two schools
of thought. HUD was of the opinion that you were
hurting minority and low-income people by
keeping them bottled up in small concentrations.
Well, after they gave money...